When studying neural activity, spike trains are one of the most common and easily interpreted methods to measure brain function. In neuroscience, the aim is to understand how various stimuli encode for sensory information, one of which being visual stimuli, which I will focus on for this project. In previous studies conduced on mice with visual stimuli, neural spike data provided valuable insight into perception, motor planning, and feedback learning in the brain. These results can then be mass applied to generalize conclusions about other organisms, including humans, and can serve to better study the brain and its neural networks.

I will be analyzing a subset of data collected by Steinmetz et al. (2019), observing the impact of visual stimuli on 10 mice. A wheel would be used to determine the mice reactions, and feedback (rewards or consequences) would be provided, depending on the mice reactions. The stimuli varied in terms of contrast levels, which took values in {0, 0.25, 0.5, 1}, with 0 indicating the absence of a stimulus. This was determined by the following guidelines:

If left contrast > right contrast, it would be deemed a success(1) if the wheel was turned to the right, and a failure(-1) otherwise. If right contrast > left contrast, it would be deemed a success(1) if the wheel was turned to the left, and a failure(-1) otherwise. If both left and right contrasts were zero, it would be deemed a success(1) if the wheel was held still, and a failure(-1) otherwise. If the left and right contrasts are equal but not zero, either left or right would be randomly chosen as the correct choice.

Additionally, neuron activity in the visual cortex was recorded during the trials in the form of spike trains, collections of time stamps that correspond to neuron firing. In this project, I focus specifically on the spike trains of neurons from the onset of the stimuli to 0.4 seconds post-onset. In addition, I only used 18 sessions (Sessions 1 to 18) from four mice: Cori, Frossman, Hence, and Lederberg. The data set includes five variables, including contrasts of left and right stimuli, spike numbers in the visual cortex, the brain area of each neuron, and feedback type (success or failure).

While previous studies focus on either brain patterns or visual stimuli separately, I intend to study them together and analyze how both work together to impact the feedback outcome. In this project, I will analyze the neural spike patterns across the brain areas, and how they affect the feedback outcomes in mice presented with visual stimuli. I aim to study the average firing rates across different brain areas, how the visual stimuli contrasts affect the feedback outcome, the relationship between the neurons and brain areas, and to effectively predict the feedback outcomes based on the patterns of brain area spike activity and the stimuli presented. I will be using Logistic regression, LASSO, k-mean clustering, and PCA to do this.
